CONCEPT.md, before:

# Circular Music: Design Philosophy

## Core Metaphor: The Shoreline

The website is a shoreline—a place shaped by forces larger than any single visit. Visitors don't come to sculpt. They arrive, interact, leave. But each interaction is a grain that either stays or goes. Over hundreds, thousands of visits, the shape changes.

---

## The Indifference of the Agent

The tide doesn't intend to sculpt. It just arrives and withdraws. The artistry is accidental, emerging from repetition meeting resistance.

- No visitor causes transformation—they're _caught up in it_
- The tide is time itself: the daily swell of waking hours, the weekly pulse, the seasonal drift
- Visitors leave traces they'll never see

Transformation happens _through_ you, not _by_ you.

---

## Asymmetry in Symmetry

Each cycle deposits and removes, but never in equal measure. Some grains stay, some leave. Over thousands of identical motions, bias accumulates into form.

- The circle wobbles imperceptibly
- That wobble _is_ the story
- Visitors are the asymmetries—the small biases that accumulate into transformation

---

## Memory Without a Mind

The shoreline is a recording medium. Every storm, every calm season, every shift in current—it's all written in the geometry. But there's no retrieval, no playback.

- The website doesn't store a history
- It doesn't show a changelog
- It doesn't narrate its own evolution
- Its current state _is_ the memory
- The form is the only record

Visitors can't compare to what was before. They only see the shoreline as it is now—shaped by everyone who came before them, shaping it imperceptibly for everyone who comes after.

**The inversion:** Every visitor thinks they're observing the site, but actually the site is being _written by_ their observation. Not in a data-harvesting way—in a geological way.

---

## Sound Atom: Noise clicks / noise bursts, neutral sound

Noise doesn't become music because it's repeated. It becomes music because it's repeated with care.

### Implementation

- Track inter-event timing consistency per user
- Reward low variance, not speed
- Ignore frantic interaction

### Musical result

- Irregular blips begin to quantize softly
- Rhythmic implication emerges without hard grids
- Beats are suggested, never enforced

Think: pulse before beat.

```
chaos → pulse → pattern
```

Also include silence!, perhaps when low activity of users.

Harmony emerges as spectral order, not chords.

### Technique Ideas for creating spectral sounds from the noise

- Gradual band-pass narrowing
- Formant-like filtering
- Spectral centroid stabilization
- Resonant filters that "lock" under repetition

---

## Long-Term Musical Form (Live Website Friendly)

You don't want loops. You want states.

### Example macro-states

1. **Diffuse** – noise, sparse, unstable
2. **Pulsing** – rhythmic suggestion
3. **Focused** – narrow spectrum, resonance
4. **Clear** – sustained, harmonically stable
5. **Fragile** – clarity that can be lost

Transitions are slow and reversible.

Importantly:

- No state is labeled
- No state is "best"
- Clear states require maintenance, not conquest

---

## Player Interactions

### Attentive Agency

- "If I do X, I feel the system change"
- No fixed outcomes
- Progress is internal and perceptual
- Encourages listening, timing, restraint

---

## Agency by Macro-State

### Diffuse — Unreliable Agency

- Actions dissipate
- Space doesn't "hold" intention
- You feel present but ineffective

This teaches patience without punishment.

### Pulsing — Temporal Agency

- Timing starts to matter
- Repetition stabilizes effects
- You feel rhythm, not control

Agency exists, but only through time.

### Focused — Directional Agency

- Small choices have predictable influence
- Attentive movement shapes outcomes
- Sloppiness still works, but less well

This is where users feel skilled without power.

### Clear — Relational Agency

- Your actions matter because of others
- Acting alone changes little
- Acting with others sustains clarity

This is social agency, not individual.

### Fragile — Restraint as Agency

- Not acting is powerful
- Overaction degrades
- Presence is contribution

This is the rarest form of agency online.

Commit message:

feat: add elementary audio skill, feat: add basic granulator

CONCEPT.md, after:

# Tidal Shaping

## Core Metaphor: The Shoreline

The website is a shoreline—a place shaped by forces larger than any single visit. Visitors don't come to sculpt. They arrive, interact, leave and might leave behind some of their interactions to the next visitor. Shaped by multiple visits, the sites imagery and sound erodes and lays bare new visuals and sounds.

---

## Tidal Indifference - Order out of chaos

Multiple visitors coming and going may be represented as tides coming and going.

The tide doesn't intend to sculpt. It just arrives and withdraws. The artistry is accidental, emerging from repetition meeting resistance.

- No single visitor causes can cause big shifts in the progress of the piece.
- Visitors leave traces they'll never see

---

## Asymmetry in Symmetry

Each cycle deposits and removes, but never in equal measure. Some grains stay, some leave. Over thousands of identical motions, bias may accumulate into form.

- Visitors are the asymmetries—the small biases that accumulate into transformation

---

## Memory Without a Mind

The shoreline as a recording medium. Every storm, every calm season, every shift in current—it's all written in the geometry. But there's no retrieval, no playback.

- The website doesn't store a history
- It doesn't narrate its own evolution
- Its current state _is_ the memory
- The form is the only record

Visitors can't compare to what was before. They only see the shoreline as it is now—shaped by everyone who came before them, shaping it imperceptibly for everyone who comes after.

**The inversion:** Every visitor thinks they're observing the site, but actually the site is being _written by_ their observation.

---

# Sound Ideas

## Granulator

Maybe a granulator, that expands its parameters the more a place on the site is visited.
Like revealing more of the underlying sound the more eroded a place becomes

## Sound Atom: Noise clicks / noise bursts, neutral sound

Noise doesn't become music because it's repeated. It becomes music because it's repeated with care.

### Implementation

- Track inter-event timing consistency per user
- Reward low variance, not speed
- Ignore frantic interaction

### Musical result

- Irregular blips begin to quantize softly
- Rhythmic implication emerges without hard grids
- Beats are suggested, never enforced

Think: pulse before beat.

```
chaos → pulse → pattern
```

Also include silence!, perhaps when low activity of users.

Harmony emerges as spectral order, not chords.

### Technique Ideas for creating spectral sounds from the noise

- Gradual band-pass narrowing
- Formant-like filtering
- Spectral centroid stabilization
- Resonant filters that "lock" under repetition

---

## Long-Term Musical Form (Live Website Friendly)

You don't want loops. You want states.

### Example macro-states

1. **Diffuse** – noise, sparse, unstable
2. **Pulsing** – rhythmic suggestion
3. **Focused** – narrow spectrum, resonance
4. **Clear** – sustained, harmonically stable
5. **Fragile** – clarity that can be lost

Transitions are slow and reversible.

Importantly:

- No state is labeled
- No state is "best"
- Clear states require maintenance, not conquest

---

## Player Interactions

### Attentive Agency

- "If I do X, I feel the system change"
- No fixed outcomes
- Progress is internal and perceptual
- Encourages listening, timing, restraint

---

## Agency by Macro-State

### Diffuse — Unreliable Agency

- Actions dissipate
- Space doesn't "hold" intention
- You feel present but ineffective

This teaches patience without punishment.

### Pulsing — Temporal Agency

- Timing starts to matter
- Repetition stabilizes effects
- You feel rhythm, not control

Agency exists, but only through time.

### Focused — Directional Agency

- Small choices have predictable influence
- Attentive movement shapes outcomes
- Sloppiness still works, but less well

This is where users feel skilled without power.

### Clear — Relational Agency

- Your actions matter because of others
- Acting alone changes little
- Acting with others sustains clarity

This is social agency, not individual.

### Fragile — Restraint as Agency

- Not acting is powerful
- Overaction degrades
- Presence is contribution

This is the rarest form of agency online.
